Welcome, Commissioner and team, to the select committee this
afternoon. You have 30 minutes, half an hour with
us. I see you have a presentation.
Yes.
So we will hand over to you to talk us through that.
Sure.
And then we'll open up for questions. Thank you.
Yes, thank you. It'll be pretty brief.
We thought it wouldn't be a proper presentation if we didn't have some slides.
I'll just quickly take you through a few interesting facts and figures,
and then you can ask whatever you like.
This little slide here shows you
how our work mix has changed. An investigation is a big
report, doorstop size.
Mm-hmm.
And that's the blue. And responding to
public concerns
are those green ones. There's lots of them, but they're little weeny things.
And then the dark green is responses to public
policy. So that is actually making submissions on government documents or
coming along here and talking to you about select committee stuff.
So you can see there's been a big increase in the amount
of government driven, both legislation and policy documents and so
on and so forth.
And
what that has meant actually is that we are doing less
in the way of investigations because we don't have the resources to do both.
So our work mix is changing. You'd expect that.
There's nothing
strange about that. It's probably happened in the past as well.
This next slide I thought might interest you.
I think I'm one of the few bits of the public sector which can tell you
precisely what our direct costs are for our work.
We're set up to do this, so I know how much public money I'm spending on each of
these big chunks of work anyhow. So you can
read that for yourself. But the one we did on the drivers of
afforestation in New Zealand, which was all about the ETS and so on and so forth,
that was-
Mm-hmm
... a thick end of $1 million.
Whereas writing a little note on the contribution of historical
methane emissions to present day warming was $12,000.
This is staff time, and it is externally contracted
work. So,
we don't have a large external budget,
because we try to employ a pretty
multidisciplinary range of skills.
So there's usually somebody on the team who knows enough to do a lot of the work,
but if we want to actually get something very precise,
we want some modeling done, or we want to actually commission some
research, then we spend money outside.
But the bulk of that is our own staff time.
But I think it's really useful and interesting.
I have to say, I used to know this stuff when I was Minister for the Environment
eons years ago. At the ministry, we had a very fine-grained
output purchasing system. It just seems to have evaporated.
And I found it very useful,
and I do now, because if you say, "Oh, well, why don't we just go and do X?"
Mm.
You've got a sense of how much resource.
It's very easy to say to staff, "Oh, just do more" or, "Just add in," but there are
limits. This actually gives you some sense of how much you've got tied up.
And also, afterwards, you can say, well, actually, was it really worth
spending so much in terms of resources and
time on a thing? So I personally think this is really good.
Now, there's something which is not up there, which will be particularly
interesting to you people on this committee, and that is our
estimate of direct staff costs associated with giving
you advice on the planning bill and
the natural environment bill between the 1st of January and the
30th of April, comes out at
$160,222.
That's the staff cost. So, you know that you had a budget for
using Rowan Carruthers KCs, who's far grander than me and charges
an enormous rate.
Here,
we're just a little office, but we've kept a track of staff time.
We've diverted $166,000 worth of staff
cost to helping the committee with that single
legislative endeavor. So it just gives you a sense, actually, of when you ask
someone to do something, it does cost.
We try to track that, so you've got a sense of how we're using our resources.
That's very helpful.
The next slides are work that's
underway or coming up. I can be very quick, and then I
suspect you probably want to ask questions.
This one is coming a bit over a month away
It won't have that title, I suspect, but it says Technologies to Unlock
Environmental Information. As you know, I've been working on this
topic for the last decade almost, the quality of New Zealand's
environmental information,
banging my head against brick walls and ministerial doors and all sorts of things
to try to get some attention, and the last budget has had some quite
positive things to say on this area.
But I've got more to say, and what we've done is tried to pull
together the findings of the last nine years really to say, "Okay,
if you want to put it all in one place, this is what the Parliamentary Commission
for the Environment thinks you need to do if you want to take this stuff
seriously."
And the bit which is new in this report, and it really is, I think it's
interesting, is just looking at some of the new
technologies which are available.
A lot of these are remote sensing from space and so on, which can change
the game, because we'll never get what we need using old
technology. So, the use of big data sets, the use of
modeling, the use of remote sensing,
this actually outlines some of the stuff, and it gives you three really nice little
case studies. We'll bring the report to you, but it goes through three bits
of New Zealand. Yours is one, Hawke's Bay.
Right. What data have we got and what haven't we got?
Just to get a sense of the... It's a bit, you could either say it's moth-eaten or
it's like Gruyère cheese. We know some stuff, and we don't know other stuff.
So this is putting the facts as we know them in front of you.
So that's going to come out in the last week in July. Mm-hmm. Is that right? Yeah.
Yeah. So you'll get that. Well, I mean, you'll have to find some time for a
hearing, but I hope you do. It's very relevant to the spatial
planning and the national environment bills that you're looking at.
Very relevant, and there is one recommendation that relates
to the new planning system in it. So,
I'm going to be producing this report before the election on
what's the future of the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme, with a
particular focus on afforestation and
offsetting.
And again, this is pulling together a lot of work I've done over the last
five or six years.
There is some new modeling in this, which we've commissioned
and worked on.
In short,
the ETS has real problems, and
forestry is at the heart of them, and somebody is going to have to
address it someday. And the longer you leave it, the more difficult it
will be. So that's what that report's about.
The next one you'll be familiar with.
Each year after the budget, we then start pulling it all apart. The famous graph.
Yes. Famous. The Sankey diagram. Yes. So you'll have this- Sankey ...
before
your scrutiny.
Actually, I don't know what happens in an election year, do you?
Because normally it's about sort of November, December, isn't it? December.
It is December, yeah. Yeah, December.
So anyhow, we'll have the latest edition of this for you to pull apart.
And again, I would suggest to you that rather than just looking at votes,
you have a look at choose an outcome or choose part of an outcome,
and look at all the agencies that are contributing.
And I mean, the last budget's had some really interesting things in it, like the
wildings stuff. Now, it's quite a big slug of money
there. Interesting question to ask about that,
in relation to other things, right,
is that too much given that you've only got so much for that outcome?
Or is it still too little? I mean, it's not to point
the finger. It's simply to get a sense of priority and where
resources are going. That's what your job is, and
I've made it my job to help you ask those
questions.
There's also a report which will probably, I would think it'll come
out early next year.
We reviewed the terrestrial
indigenous
biosecurity management system. That was the weeds report.
We're doing the same for offshore- Mm-hmm ... for the marine environment.
So, it'll be the same sort of report.
It'll say, "Okay,
these are the issues." We've got some interesting original research on
biosecurity risk assessment.
Here's the state of things. This is the way MPI is going
about it, and could it be done better?
I have to tell you, this is much harder stuff than stuff on
land. It would be. Mm-hmm. So I doubt whether we'll be saying as
much actually. But it'll be interesting. So that one's coming down the track.
Then this is a really big one. This is for next year.
Resource efficiency of the New Zealand economy.
This goes back at least a couple of years, and we will have spent a lot of
money on this,
by the time we finish it. But you will be aware, you're always
hearing people saying, "Oh, we need to have zero waste" or circular
economy and all of this stuff. There's a lot of aspirational stuff
around this. There is. I think people frequently have no idea
what they are saying when they make these claims.
And so what I wanted to do was to understand
just what the resource flows and the pollution
flows from those resource flows in our economy look like.
And, we've put out a report last year,
which gave an overview of New Zealand's current natural resource use profile.
You've got that. So that was an early piece of work.
What we're going to be focusing on now is how resource use
and waste generation might evolve over the coming decades.
And we're not just looking at the New Zealand economy, we're looking at New Zealand
and the global economy. So we can track resource use in terms of
imports
and in terms of our exports, but also the environmental
footprint of the imports because a lot of the time we say we're all clean and
green, but we've just offshored it.
And also the-
Our environment down to provide the goods we provide.
So it's a
reasonably sophisticated piece of work.
We've been working with the people who do the GTAP models at Purdue
University in the States,
to commission some of the underlying input for this.
This is a thing which a lot of governments do.
I think the New Zealand government should've done this years ago. It doesn't.
So we've done it. But I think it will be as
good as anything anyone's done in the world at a national
level. And if you've got this information and you're prepared to
then... We've done the methodology, so to speak.
If you'd like to carry this forward, this should be a tool that MB
or M-cert or whatever it is,
they should be actually doing this stuff.
Because if you want to ask questions about resource flows in the New Zealand
economy, this is absolutely vital information, and we have not had it
up until now. So anyway.
And it's useful not just for environmental stuff-
No
... but for supply chain and-
Yeah
... that sort of stuff.
Can I just ask a question? How are you going to get proprietary information, like
information held by private companies to put into this?
There are global-
Yeah
... input output tables that-
... you
can't think that this stuff is accurate to a decimal point.
No. No.
But it does give you
a pretty accurate overview of the flow of
resources.
So it's going to be open source data, is it?
Yeah.
Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. And there's a ton of the stuff.
There's a ton of the stuff, it's just not being analyzed in a way which can
provide these sort of answers. But as Jeff says, on the supply
chain side, it's really interesting.
We know where we get stuff from, we know who buys from us,
what's the
overall picture?
So-
Can I just add something there?
Yeah, go for it.
So,
when you're making a widget
you can have an environmental footprint, which is what this is measuring,
but your widget still probably is still
got a lower footprint than potentially is made anywhere in the world.
It might. Or it might not.
So bringing that into the report as well to make sure-
Yes
... we've got context of actually-
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah
... it's not just the imp- it's not-
Yeah. No. And this is the thing, what it will show, I think, is
that some of the stuff we import has a very heavy footprint.
If you did it here, it might be lower or vice versa.
The whole point is this is not about trying to hone in on a
problem, it's to say, "Look, this is fundamental
data which should be in the public arena." We're putting it together,
so then if this committee or if a government department or a minister wanted to
do to ask some questions, you have a methodology
for doing it. So anyhow, I'm sorry, you'll have to wait till next year for that one
.
Then just quickly some research notes that we're going to be doing.
Because mining is on the up in
terms of fast-track applications and so forth,
we thought we'd just find out what we knew about
what best practice looked like if you were going to be proposing
to mine, and what sort of conditions would be placed
on mine operators, particularly thinking of the long term after it's
closed and all the rest of it. So we've commissioned some international
work to try to get a sense of that and,
once we've finished peer reviewing that and digesting it, we'll make that
available. So again, it's a bit of a resource which will be available to
panels, it'll be available to the government.
We've just tried to say, "Well, this is what we know about best practice." When?
What's the timing on that?
That should be public
in between those two other reports, early
August, I would think.
Okay. Right. So it's quite close.
Second one, if you want to click on is,
I'll let you talk about this because it's very much your patch.
Yeah.
Monetizing ecosystems.
Again, this was sort of prompted by the
sorts of conversations that are being thrown up by fast-track about how
you come up with net benefits, a net benefit test for a lot of
these
economic development projects. And there's a
lot of discussion about how you factor in
the value of the environment into those sorts of conversations.
And so what we're doing is updating
the work. There's only really been one big study done on this in
New Zealand. It was done in 2013,
and it was very rudimentary at the time, and we are updating that for
the latest thinking on this. It
doesn't help you think about the value of very rare
or endangered ecosystems, but it is a tool
that can be used to think about the value of
ecosystem services,
when you're trading them off for-
Yeah
... say, mining or infrastructure projects writ large. Yeah.
And why did you choose that photo? And do you think there's a fast-track mining
project
up for trade?
Don't worry. You've got-
No, I've got a bit of a penchant for botanical gardens.
All right.
So
Okay, taking out-
A member for Dunedin was concerned.
Yes.
That makes you nervous.
Don't read anything into that.
Then
you may recall before the last election, there were all
sorts of claims being made about the oil and gas ban, and I just produced a little
note saying, "Well, will the sky fall in economically, and will the sky
fall in..." Or, sorry, "Will this make the planet safe environmentally?"
Because I really thought it was a very uninformed sort of debate, and
so we came up with a note which said, "Well, actually, look,
it's really not such a big deal economically, and by the way, environmentally it
isn't a particularly big deal either."
The government no doubt has its reasons for doing that.
I'm
looking at doing just an update to put some of the facts on
the table, in the hope that As you all have these
debates, it'll be a useful resource to you.
Again, it's not taking a
policy position, it's just
updating those facts and saying what we know
about them. All right? And then finally, here,
and this I do hope the committee takes an interest in,
the science reforms, as you know, have now well
advanced and we've
seen how much money's been given to each of the four pillars, and I've put
everyone on notice that you can move the money around. That's fine.
I will be tracking the extent to which public
money is being taken away from the environment and put into other pillars,
and I will be tracking the consequences both for research output
and for the human capital base,
because I really am concerned. I have to say, the
environment,
there is a reduction planned in environmental research because it's all been done
off a zero baseline, which does surprise me.
I'd have thought that if this is one area where really the country should be
investing more, but my view is my view.
But certainly, the reduction in environment is not enormous.
But when you are spending as little as we are, even small
reductions can have a significant impact.
Tracking that is not easy, and in fairness to
the government's reallocation of resources, this high tech pillar, which they're
putting the lion's share of the reallocation to, some of
that will probably be spent in technologies which are being used in the
environment, and that's one of the things my report to you in a month's time is
going to say. Look, we really need to build our
technical skill base on measuring stuff.
So it's not a straightforward and easy thing, but I am working
closely with MB, who've been very helpful, I have to say, in
trying to track where money is currently being spent and where it'll be spent in
the future. I can tell you now that the new system
will, once it finally settles down, be better than where we were
because right now, MB cannot tell you until after the
event where quite a lot of the money gets spent.
And in my view, that's
not ideal. I think as a parliament,
you should know where the priorities are and where the money
is going
in relatively real time, and it is possible to do that.
And that's
the best thing about the reform, which I think once it plays out, we'll
have better information. If it shows there's a reduction in environmental
research, I will be able to track that through that Sankey diagram to
tell you which bits of environmental research are most affected.
Because it could be that there's increases in some areas, but there's
reductions in others. So, again, it's just a piece of accounting tracking.
This is the committee which should take an interest
in that, and I think that is it.
Is it?
We've got one last slide on potential investigations.
Oh, sorry. Well, yeah, I won't spend too long on this because we're still thinking
about this.
Once we've completed the piece of work on resource efficiency, then
okay, all right, well, that's nice. What do you do with that?
And one of the things we could do is look sectorally at the New Zealand
economy and ask the same questions, but in a more applied way.
I'm particularly interested in this food security one.
I wouldn't have thought this was an issue for a country like New Zealand, but
you talk to, as I did, some of the arable people in
Canterbury and the fact that you've got
some imported commodities effectively putting them out of
business. Now, fine, it's the cheapest if it comes from Oz,
except when the supply chains get disrupted and suddenly you
can't put that back together because you've lost the skills, you've
lost the IP in some cases. So
there's interesting issues right through the economy.
I'm thinking about food security as one.
And the other one is, you'd be aware that DOC has got this bioinvest
tool,
to try to decide
which moth you save next sort of thing.
And it's really quite a sophisticated piece of work.
I really want to review that and ask
what are the sort of trade-offs we're making.
Do we know enough to even know whether we're meeting conservation goals?
How would we
actually go about that? So we haven't done any
detailed thinking about either of those, but those are the next big investigations
I hope we can get off the block next year. So there we are.
That's what we're doing. That's how we're spending your four odd million
dollars.
And it is the smallest, I think it's just about the smallest appropriation
on the books. So we're very careful with it.
You certainly do a lot with it. But hey-
Yeah
... thank you very much, Simon.
Great.
Appreciate that presentation. Look, we'll open up to questions now.
And Celia has had her hand up online-
Yeah, she has
... for quite some time, so we will go to Celia first.
I should have introduced Helen, by the way-
Hi, Helen
... who's the chief ops officer, and I think you know Jeff, who's my
chief policy guy.
Brilliant. Celia.
Thank you, and kia ora. One of my questions about whether you'd be looking at
bioinvest, you beautifully answered in the last slide, so that's
great.
I did have a couple of questions about the environment
spend, and then one question about your
targets. So with the environment spend, and I've
probably asked you this before,
is there any work going on seeing how much councils put
in as well as government agencies, or do you feel that that
is outside your remit?
We are actually doing a pilot-
Yeah
... which will be in this year's estimate of environmental
expenditure, which looks at exactly that issue.
It's not all beer and skittles, frankly.
It's not
easy to do. But we have
given it a crack for a few councils for one year,
and so you'll see the results of that.
I think the key issue going forward
is around
the council reform process.
Yeah.
That's really why we didn't continue the work any further because, uh-
Yeah. They're just up to their ears. This is regional councils we're working with.
Okay? Because they are the main
spenders on the environment as distinct from other types of planning.
So they're the ones that we need to talk to.
Well, I have to say that you might
revise that when you think about Predator Free Wellington.
It's certainly the city council-
Yeah
... an equal player, but there we are.
Yes.
A minor detail in the scheme of things.
My question, if
the chair will allow me to ask one and then I'll
shut up, is the targets you've got about the
number of recommendations that are adopted.
Now, unless you're going to provide a whole lot of really wishy-washy
targets- ... that, which I hope you don't do,
that is really fairly much out of your
control.
Yes.
And I don't know that it's... It's quite interesting, in my view, it
shows which governments are taking any notice and which aren't, but I'm not
sure that's your job to-
No, we don't have control. No, and we've talked about this every year.
We do this because the Audit Office says we have to, basically.
Well, let's try not doing it. I mean-
No, no. Oh, no, no, no.
No, no, no.
We have a very good relationship with the Auditor's Office. It's fine.
Look, it's fine to... I think we should track, I think we really should track the
extent to which our recommendations are picked up.
Okay.
But it's not within our hands, as you say.
And the other thing is that recommendations might not be picked up
in year one or year two, or even in year three, but over
time, the ideas are socialized, and it's a resource which gets drawn on.
So, we do actually have a reasonable hit rate.
The money that the government is spending in this year's budget,
adding to the information base, is not unrelated to the fact
that I have been hammering this point for the last six or seven years.
So eventually, things do find their way into the
system. But equally, I think you're right, Celia, it would be
just crazy if I came up with recommendations to try to hit some
target. It could be a sign that I'm really on the money, only
10% were picked up because, in fact, they are so
difficult, people are having a lot of trouble digesting them.
Thank you very much, and thank you for focusing on the big issues.
And a very cheeky last question, you should be leading
MCERT, and then we'll all be happy.
Oh, I see. Okay.
I'm not sure that appeals.
Rachel, a supplementary.
Yeah. You're still on this proportion of your recommendations that
are adopted. How do you track things like the data
one that you just said? Because you have been-
Banging on
... I think you said banging on.
Yeah.
And I'm not going to disagree-
... with that turn of phrase at all.
How do you track those things that you've been saying repetitively?
Yeah.
But also, how do you track the things that you might have done a report about some
years ago that is-
You need to come over and see Sean's spreadsheet-
Oh, okay
... which is meticulous.
Yeah.
We have somebody called Sean.
Sean.
I think Sean might have been born in the PCE's office.
His institutional memory exceeds
anything else in the public sector in the space, literally.
He goes back a very long way. He goes back three commissioners.
Yeah.
And he honestly
has all of those recommendations, and he tracks them.
Fantastic. That's great. Great to hear about Sean.
Can I ask-
Yeah, yeah
... another question on that? And so on your
analysis, on Sean's analysis, do you look at
how you are influential in terms of, I know you've changed over the
years some of your reports. You'll do smaller
summaries of them, and that was from feedback from select committees, and
you bang on about things for years and years, and you talk to very
many different people. Are there other ways you think, or
is there a best way to try and get
things into our political heads,
to ask the right questions in opposition and to make the right
budget choices and other things in government?
We're really outside my role.
My role's set in an act, as you know.
By the way, I just read the report of the Offices of Parliament,
a select committee on Offices of Parliament from 1988.
Mm-hmm.
And this included names like the Honorable Ruth Richardson and Mr.
Murray McClee, and the Honorable Trevor Klean.
And the chair was not Bill Sutton, the other Sutton from your
side. But they all said-
Jim. Jim Sutton.
Jim Sutton, that's right. From Ōmaru.
Yeah.
Yes, that's right. And it's a very interesting report because they were
asked, why should we have ... offices of Parliament, how should we set them up?
And they said
everyone agreed, all six members, both sides of the House,
all six members said it was to hold the executive to account
because that was Parliament's responsibility.
Mm.
So to some extent,
leave aside what the Environment Act says-
Mm
... I strongly agree with that. I think that this office, and in a different way,
the other two
offices of Parliament, are here to help Parliament hold the
executive to account. Because in our system, the executive's got all the keys and
just about all the power.
Yeah.
So if you want to have a high quality
discussion about what's being proposed, this is a
safe, reliable source of information-
Mm. Yep
... that you can look to. You
ask,
what's a better way? I'm sorry, if you're
unhappy, you say, "Couldn't make sense of that."
I'm not unhappy. I'm just wondering.
No, but if your view is you're not doing it the most useful way, you need to say
so. Otherwise, I would strongly recommend you read what we do,
come and talk to us, and make use of it.
Can I just add-
Which I do.
I think the biggest change in the way we operate over the last
few years is not writing summaries.
It's
that resource shift that the commissioner outlined early on in that presentation.
Yeah.
Quite a big resource has shifted from long-term proactive
investigations to a more
reactive role, based on-
Yeah, and that was my next question.
Yeah.
Right.
Is that
sort of legislative advice that you give, is that included in
the proportion of recommendations adopted?
No.
Yeah, so that's a difficult thing to-
Not as far as I'm aware
... well, one thing we are looking at is having a different
target for that, because-
Yeah
... the take-up of those recommendations is quite different.
As the commissioner said, the shelf life of the
big investigations is much longer, and they actually, when you look at them over a
10-year period, they have quite a high hit rate.
But as you can imagine, the shelf life of
an input into the policy process is much shorter-
Weeks. Weeks
... and has a
much lower take-up rate.
When you think of the number of recs we've given you on these two bills-
Yeah.
When it comes back to the House, either they'll have been accepted or they won't
have been, and that's that.
Mm.
And there's no chance to change that.
Whereas, when we do a major investigation, things are
alive. They're slow burners in some cases.
Mm.
Yeah.
David, question.
Thank you.
I'll try and be very quick because we've got such a short time.
No.
Number one,
your office, I believe, is the most valuable resource that we have as a committee.
It's actually free.
And I mean that sincerely with the fact that you can do a lot of work that helps us
be informed to do the good work we do.
Good.
So I thank you for that.
We have that minute today.
I know. But I can't help but notice-
Yeah
... that your spend over many years has been
stagnant.
Yes.
Okay?
Yeah.
And the question I have out of that is, number one,
how do you decide whether you're doing enough, doing too
little-
Mm.
With regards to it, because I would suggest that your spend is actually
not even keeping up with inflation. So what's your process?
And look, it's interesting you ask that because my budget, of course, goes to
the Offices of Parliament select committee, not this one.
And so we have this discussion every year, and usually there's a member who
says, "Look, is it enough? Is it enough?" When I first
took the job on, the first question was, "Have you got enough money?" And I said,
"Well, look, I haven't done the job yet. I don't know.
Let's see."
That's awesome.
Of course, nine years on, I can't give that answer again.
But to be frank, David, my answer is this.
It's how long is a piece of string? You could double the amount
of money and we could easily do more.
But the question I've got, I put this to the Offices of Parliament select
committee every time, push it back and say,
"Would you listen to me any more because I made more
recommendations?" And to be frank with you, I'm not
convinced that you would.
So I've come to you twice... Not to you.
I've come to Parliament twice and said that we really do need to increase it.
So we've broadly kept
up. But the other thing is, I've got 15, 16 FTEs.
Mm.
They're very high quality people.
I think it's some of the best quality in the public service I know of.
You try and double that, it's not easy.
To get really good people, it's quite hard.
I don't want to be a lackluster agency.
I want to do a small amount of stuff really well.
Yep. So can I-
Yes, go for it.
I think it's... I'll make a statement.
I think you've got to see whether you're actually satisfied or
dissatisfied with what you're doing.
Yes. Quite so.
I think that's more of the question you ask yourself.
But can I just come back to the, is it Zanchi graph?
Zanchi.
Zanchi. Zanchi diagram. Yeah.
So we always look at that every year and we think this is really good, but I'm
just thinking how can we go to the next step?
Oh.
And at the moment, it's a quantitative, it's showing us where the dollar
is being spent in a space,
but it's not telling us is it meeting ministers'
policy expectations. It's not telling us whether the You
talked about the benefit of the likes of
monetizing the ecosystem.
Yeah.
What would be really good for us is also the quality of the spend.
So I'm just asking the question of whether there's potential to
evolve what you're doing here-
Yeah. Absolutely
... to the next step, because that's truly getting to the nub of what we're trying
to do-
Absolutely. I've been-
... is hold the executive to account-
Yeah. Absolutely
... about what they're delivering and what's the quality of their delivery.
But I've been trying to get this committee for the last three years to
use exactly that. Go to the next step.
If you use that diagram, have a discussion, decide what looks to be the
most interesting area of spend, and then say, "That's what we want to
focus on," I can then help you ask the next round of
questions. And you have a power that I don't have
You can say to four or five ministries, "We want
answers to these questions by next Tuesday." I can't do that.
Could I be the devil's advocate here?
Yeah.
I would suggest that you do work, or for us to
ask you to go away and do it on predator-
Sure
... control.
Yeah.
Or water quality.
Or whatever.
Yeah.
Get down to that more granular level.
Yep.
What I'm saying out of your office, and I'm looking at the budget, I'm saying, "Can
we do more here?" I know you say you've got, is it half an FTE
that does that graph every year? Whatever it is.
Yes, yes.
I'm just sort of saying-
2.4 people
... keep on doing the great work you're doing.
Yeah.
And how can we take it to the next level?
Look, I'm sure I could make the case for a bit more if the
committee wanted to use us on that sort of basis more regularly.
Yeah.
So far, you haven't wanted to engage on that.
If you want to, then-- and if you said, "Look, we want to do an
investigation a year using that diagram, focus on an area, focus on an
outcome," then I think we could team up and do something very useful.
It wouldn't be hugely expensive, but it would be, I'd then know
that that needed to be in my base load moving forward.
If you'd like to talk about this again-
Yeah
... I'm very happy to come back, because I think you are not using to the full
what we're providing-
Yeah
... to you.
This one.
No, and we are going to have to wrap it up there.
But I would say, of course, we are very interested in this area, but
of course, we've had huge work to do-
Sure. Yeah
... on this committee with the RMA reform, that your office has equally
been as busy with and involved with us on.
Yeah.
And so, it kind of does become a measure of
priorities and focus-
Yeah
... as well. So,
thank you very much for your time. Thank you for that presentation.
Thank you for all the work you do for our committee. We really appreciate it.
Mm.
It's really valuable. And thank you.
Pleasure.
Yeah.
Is that okay?
Thank you.
And we're still friends with the oils.
You think? Yeah,
that's
fair.
Yeah, and in conference.
And all in Wellington, so.
We don't do ours for a while. We always do it late.
Welcome back to the select committee this
afternoon.
Sam, Nadine, and Anna.
And Anne, yep.
Welcome.
Thank you for joining us again. So we have 30 minutes
with you. So,
we can hand it back over to you if there's any kind of comments that you wanted to
make generally. Otherwise, we can then open it up for questions.
Well, thank you, and Kia Ora. And if you don't mind, I wouldn't mind just taking a
little minute-
Yes, go ahead
... to start, because this is possibly the
last time MFA
meets with this committee. So it'd just
be nice to
acknowledge a couple of things. But just, yes, introducing
two of my colleagues at the table, Nadine Domise and Anne Huirapa,
two members of the SLT.
Yeah, so first actually, I just wanted to thank the committee.
I have been coming to meet with the Environment Select
Committee, whose membership of course has changed over the years,
for some time. And
it has at times been
testing and the lines of inquiry have been challenging, as
people have jobs to do.
But I just wanted to say that at no point in the
numerous years I've been coming, has
the committee been anything less than fully professional and respectful of
officials. So I just want to thank you for that.
You've been really good to work with.
Secondly, I actually want to thank
the team back at MFE.
There's a small number of us tend to front these sessions
and speak to the work that MFE does, but we
actually don't do a lot of that work.
Or certainly speak for myself, we don't do a lot of that work ourselves.
So
yeah, I really wanted to shout out to staff at MFE,
who in the last few years, quite a lot has been happening in and around
our staff. We've had growth, we've had downsizings, we've had changes in
government and changes in policy direction,
and a merger
not too far away. And
people have carried some uncertainty through all of that and,
throughout it all, it has not
got in the way of the team doing a great job and always delivering
what's needed to be delivered, whether that is the reform
agenda of the government of the day or our statutory function.
So yeah, special shout-out to the staff.
And I've had the pleasure of working with them for seven years,
and I can confidently say that the
culture and professional ethic and expertise that those staff
are carrying into MCERT will be a huge asset for that
organization.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sam. And would like to, yeah, acknowledge you and the
team and all the work. We do really appreciate it and
appreciate all the times you've come before us on the select committee to
talk many, many areas. But look, we will open it up
for discussion.
So members, if you have any questions you would like to
ask the team here in relation to
both environment,
MCERT, any of the issues. Obviously, we've traversed quite a few of the
areas with the ministers this morning.
But this is an opportunity to
ask MFE any questions you would like to.
Yep.
Cameron, did you have the next? There we go.
Yes. Just a follow-up on this morning's conversation.
You said you'd come back with more information.
Yeah. So I might hand over to Anne, who will kick that off.
Good afternoon. Yes, there are some unanswered questions from this morning
I'm keen to pick up around,
the EnviroCon investment.
So the first one you asked around, is it co-investment?
It is, and the ratio is 40%
government funding, 60% by EnviroCon.
You asked-
Is the government taking an ownership for it?
Is it an investment or is it a grant?
It's a grant. So the second point you had-
Oh, so it's not, it's a grant.
Yeah.
Okay.
So your second point was, is it going to be paid back?
No, because it is a grant, like all of our funding under the Waste
Minimization Fund is.
The
point around there being an existing market for concrete recycling in
Tauranga is a very legitimate one, and
we
want to acknowledge that, and also acknowledge that the press release that came out
this week spoke to concrete waste quite generally.
And it wasn't as clear as it could be about the particular
type of waste within that broader concrete waste group
that this investment targets. So I'd like to just provide a bit of
clarity and detail around that, which I'm hoping will help.
So
an important element of this is it targets a particular
type of concrete waste called wet-ready concrete
mix.
Surplus.
Yes. So it's the-
The leftover
... it's the leftover wet concrete that's in trucks.
It is perishable, it sets quickly. It's got about a three to four-hour lifespan.
It needs to be rapidly collected before it hardens.
Our analysis of what's available in Tauranga indicated that there
isn't currently a facility that can address that specific
type of waste.
And that was confirmed by our work with Tauranga Council.
It's our understanding, others may have different views, but our
analysis also showed that that particular waste is going to
landfill.
So just a follow-up question on two parts.
Sure.
Well, it's probably more of a comment.
I know from my own experience, maybe the council doesn't know, but there are
definitely people reusing
surplus overboard to make
blocks. Yeah, so that is actually happening at the moment.
And I think, I can think of two companies off the top of my head.
But second thing I was going to ask was a question that I had
this morning for more information was there was the claim it was going to divert
tons, 28,000 tons.
And I asked, was there a knowledge by MFE of how
many tons were actually going to landfill at the moment?
Because talking to people in the construction area in Tauranga especially,
saying, "That seems an awful lot, considering what's actually already being
recycled."
Okay.
So is there a knowledge of how many ton is actually going to landfill?
Can we come back to you on that number? It's quite a detailed point.
Well, I-
Is that all right?
You can, but I'll just make the point that this morning I've asked.
You said there was a business case.
I would assume something like that would be in the business case you'd come back
with out the answer. So I'm happy for you to come back, but I think you have
come back, and I specifically asked for that this morning, but-
Well, I think that they've said they'll come back, Cameron.
So,
I think that's fair.
Can I ask one more thing?
Sure.
But the business case, how public is that?
Is it in the public realm?
Do we post it on our website or something like that?
Well, would I be able to see it?
I would expect so, just in the same way that you would under official information.
We're happy to provide more details.
There is quite a lot of analysis that's gone into it. We can share that.
Quite happy to.
Okay.
Yeah, I suspect that a lot of the documents associated with the
funding bid are probably
Not published proactively over the 10 month.
But you
could get access to them to the extent they weren't commercially sensitive, sorry,
in no way out.
I would have to check that, though. We can come back on that.
Yeah. So I think that you'll come back with some of that information.
Yeah.
Thank you. Look, we'll now go to
Lan, at BlueScope.
Yeah. Thank you, and thank you for all the work,
MFE. It's been fantastic.
Yeah.
My question was about this new MCERT and your
move to MCERT and, because we heard a lot from ministers how this
is like a new chapter and environmental aspects are going to be
strengthened and whatnot. And I'm really interested
because we didn't get any
information from ministers about the practicalities of
how MFE moving to MCERT will actually
work. So I'm specifically interested
in when MCERT gives
policy advice to ministers,
to government,
what will that look like? What is contemplated in the next
while? Can you help us understand that?
Specific terms.
So, look, I think I can start to answer that question.
I'm not sure I can give you a definitive answer because some of the
ways of working and operating
are yet to be
confirmed, and that'll be something for...
Remembering,
MCERT at the moment
is a shell.
Mm-hmm.
And the staff haven't transferred, and
it really doesn't take life until the 1st of July, and there's a heck of a lot of
work
in front of the SLT.
So
there'll be quite a lot of thinking about how to operationalize the way we
deliver advice.
Having said that,
I think Minister Greig mentioned that.
So the Environment Act provisions and the expectations that
rest on, or have rested on MFE and the Environment Act
to provide advice in relation to environmental outcomes and issues,
those carry through and are attached now to the Secretary's
environment.
So, the secretary will have to
demonstrate how they have discharged that responsibility.
I imagine that the annual report will be
one mechanism through which they would need to report on how they've
discharged that responsibility.
But there are probably a number of ways in which you could operationalize
that expectation. Part of it will be at the general level,
exposing the trade-offs that are associated with
judgments, and in particular when we're talking about environmental or climate
impacts, being able to make sure when our advice goes across that we're clear
about
what the environmental or climate implications of a particular
decision or set of options will be.
But there are quite a few ways you could operationalize that.
Part of it will be cultural. I think the culture of the place
and the expectation set by leadership will be probably more important than
whatever systems you build to ensure that those trade-offs
are drawn out.
Mm-hmm.
So I think there's a bit in statute, there'll be a lot in culture and leadership,
and there'll be some of it played out through systems and practices that you
design-
Mm
... in terms of your ways of working and operating.
So just something to throw on that.
So
is there an intention,
and maybe the CE of MCERT is the only person who can answer this, I don't
know.
Yeah.
But is there an intention as far as you're aware that
there will be essentially,
MCERT will tell the public
how they are going about these things before we get to the end of the first year,
and they're actually reporting how they actually did it?
Because I think that's the main concern that's come from the public.
They're like, "Well, what is this actually going to look like now?
Are these trade-offs going to be behind the scenes, and how are we going to know
about them?" Now, I'm noting you're saying different ways to do it.
Yeah.
But what about the intention about actually bringing people along
with the new organization?
Yeah. I feel like I can't speak for Jeremy,
and it'd be a bit unfair of me to try and characterize
what he is anticipating at the moment, and he will still be doing his own
thinking about exactly how to bring that to life.
So I suppose I can only really talk about what
there is, and there's still a whole lot of statutory expectations on the
secretary. There's still a whole lot of legislation that we have to
administer. There's a range of acts that place
obligations, Waste Minimization Act, Climate Change Response Act,
amongst a number, that place obligations on government
to,
and that MFE will, well, MCERT will need to continue to
provide support to ministers
in ensuring that they do discharge those obligations.
But then there's a whole lot of design, as I said, that
Jeremy needs to be given the chance to-
Mm-hmm
... to work through and then represent himself.
What about in the transfer, like the MFE
part itself, what about priorities
that MFE will be bringing through into MCERT?
Like, do they retain, or is it sort of,
again, up to the CE to decide what they are?
So, well, again, there
is a statutory architecture. It's really important to keep that in mind.
So that sets some parameters, and we will have statutory
functions that we need to exercise.
Of course, governments will have different priorities,
and we'll have to tilt accordingly in terms of our work program.
I can tell you that-
We have done some business planning
internally. I think it's reasonable to share that that business planning
has been done on the basis of, for
now, essentially extending the activities and the
functions that we currently undertake.
And so we've extended out and planned to continue to deliver the
kind of work that we are currently delivering, and we'll do that for
six months. We've got an election, of course,
in November, and so inevitably there will be new government priorities
that emerge post-election, and then we'll need to make
adjustments. So...
Darling.
Could I?
Oh, do you mind if I just maybe give a practical example
of what is in the current work program and sets out the work
program for this year.
So we know that we, again, have a big work program ahead
in terms of the national instruments.
That includes the environmental limit setting framework, it includes biodiversity,
it includes freshwater, it includes a number of other matters,
including natural hazards, et cetera. That has not changed.
And we also equally know that we have a big work program ahead in
terms of land use planning, spatial planning,
standardized zones. That has not changed.
So as Sam has indicated, the
statutes, the key functions remain,
and the job for MERT, and officials within
MERT, is to provide, as always, free and frank advice on all of
those matters in order to progress that work ahead
and to provide that advice.
At day one, the expectation is that we will be continuing to
do the same work and meet the expectations of
the same statutory requirements that we currently operate to.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. We will move, because we've got a couple of other
primary questions. Rachel.
You can... Yeah, okay. Okay, just a little one on
waste, going back to the waste secretary.
The minister, I think she said just before she left,
that
the waste updated legislation was
on the agenda, and she didn't know if it was going to be introduced before
the election or not. So it's just...
And she just referred to the Waste Minimization Amendments.
Are there-
Mm
... Litter Act amendments as well?
It's all still
caught up together.
Yeah.
So I'm pretty confident that we were still planning to.
Nothing's changed in the sense of bringing together the Litter Act and the Waste
Minimization Act, and that's part of the
reform agenda.
Okay. And so you don't...
Can you give any more specific update, or it's just-
No, it's really just a matter of timing, of finding house time-
Time
...
to get the bill introduced.
Okay. Thank you. So it is written, drafted.
I'd have to double, triple-check that.
Nearly. So we've actually, so the policy decisions have been made, and the Cabinet
paper has been proactively released.
So it goes through the detail of what the actual policy changes will be.
The bill is in the process of being drafted now.
Introduction and all of that will depend on really things that-
Okay. No, no.
Yeah.
I understand.
Don't want you to say anything else. Thank you. Can I ask a different primary?
Yeah, you can go, and then I'll come back to you, Lan.
Okay. So different primary. Also don't want
to ask officials anything that they can't answer about the
bills that are in front of the select committee at the moment, but this
is about those bills and about
the regulatory
relief. And I would have asked the minister this before he
left.
But
is there information
on, or has it been
quantified, the total annual cost to councils of the regulatory relief?
And can you comment on that and impacts that it might have
on rate payers that regulatory relief-
I think that those are all matters before the environment select committee at the
moment.
Yeah, I think that that is out of-
No. Well, I think-
So it's, just because it is questions that we have asked
officials during the RMA process-
Well, we won't say that
...
and so, there could be that, I just think that that's a select committee
process, so-
Yep
... yeah.
I mean, what I would say, in and around that process
underway is that
we would expect that once the legislation is settled, if
there's been any changes from introduction, then we would look at that and modeling
as required.
Okay. Thank you.
And I think, I mean, yeah, obviously-
No, no, no. I appreciate that
... we came through the submission process, so,
Lan.
Just on broadly, so the sort of 400 million,
roughly 390 something,
for RM reform, is your understanding that that in its
entirety is for the functions of
MERT to see that work through? Or is there
areas of that funding that has been tagged, for
example, for implementation and actually helping,
like maybe going to local government or helping local government implement
stuff? Can you help us understand that?
Absolutely. So the funding specifically
for the MERT component, noting of course, that there's a portion there for the
Ministry of Justice for the planning tribunal, but for the
planning system, MERT component, is
essentially, 294 million.
I think about it roughly in terms of a third.
So a third of that is for the national instruments
that I was referring to before. That is quite a big work program.
A third is for supporting the change, so the
transition for local government, and that specifically,
we have work underway with- Local
government with individual councils to understand what's most helpful for them,
depending upon the final form of the legislation, of course.
And then a third is the data and the digital investment that I spoke to
earlier today.
Okay, thank you. That's really helpful.
Yeah.
Rachel.
A different query. Going to the fast track, we had some
conversation about that earlier.
Just a question for the ministry on what work
the ministry is doing to look at how that's
working and what the impact of those decisions
on the fast track are to
other planning considerations. The minister and I had a bit of back and forth about
saying it's the end of all planning in Queenstown, for instance.
So
is there some analysis of what the
consequences of those fast track is, and how will that
impact on future planning decisions?
What I would say about fast track is that when you think of it
in terms of the planning system, which is where the conversation was going this
morning,
the fast track provides a pathway
for those big complex projects and other projects.
The ministers have been really clear that that pathway is an important pathway and
remains.
In sitting alongside the more enabling pathways that are currently being
considered in the bills for the legislation.
You heard from the minister this morning,
his ambition in terms of unlocking capacity and growth.
So, I won't speak further to that. What I will say is that
this is about providing, in its totality, a
more enabling planning system. When it
comes to the individual detail of,
for example, what that means on local networks, then
there is flexibility both within the fast track, but within also the broader
planning system for councils to have those conversations
with individual developers and applicants.
So
that's
the policy intention there.
So no is the answer there. What about any analysis
into the... Something that you've all heard me
go on about is that the purpose statement of
the fast track doesn't have any environmental caveat to it.
Doesn't say in accordance with sustainable management or anything like that.
And then there's the hierarchy and the legislation that you have to give the
greatest weight, or there's some other words to the purpose, which
is to facilitate projects.
And has there been any analysis on the decisions that have come out on the
fast track and what impact they might have on the environment that would
be different from if a decision had been made under the RMA?
Fast track does enable environmental considerations to
be considered.
Yes.
There is a different threshold in the legislation, of course.
Yeah. There's the hierarchy difference.
There is a hierarchy difference, but it does enable those significant environmental
considerations to be considered. So, that is the policy intention.
The new legislation
also is intended to be more enabling, obviously subject to any
changes through the environments committee process.
In terms of what that all means on achieving
outcomes, the new legislation does include
quite strong provisions around monitoring both the
outcomes of the legislation, the system performance framework.
So, that is where the net effect, if you like, of
both the
promotion of growth and housing those other elements
alongside environmental limits and what that means.
That's where that will come together and be monitored both at a
local scale, but also at a national level.
Okay, so you're saying the monitoring will happen in the new system?
It will.
And then, are you also part saying, I don't want
to put too many words into your mouth, but that the fast track
arrangements are supposed to be similar to the new
systems arrangements in terms of a hierarchy and where the environment comes
into it, and to be more enabling?
No, I'm not saying that specifically at all.
I'm really just pointing out that there are different thresholds.
But I did want to make the point that the environmental considerations
are able to be considered in fast track as well, obviously within the new
legislation. But you are right, in that there are different thresholds there.
Thank you, and Lan will take one last question.
Just a supplementary on fast track.
Have there
been resourcing changes within MFE as the fast
track process evolves? I think it was about five to six
FTEs that were supporting the minister in her
commentary on those projects. Is that sort of standard
now? Is it more or less?
So there are two
roles or functions that the ministry undertakes in relation to fast track.
The first is
with respect to stewardship of the system,
and the resourcing around that team,
for the 26/27 financial year sits at 13,
seven of which are permanent. And then there is another area and
another function that we perform to support the ministers for
environment and climate change, and there are
3.6 FTEs allocated for that work.
Okay, thank you. And sorry, the
stewardship,
is that about Accepting the applications,
checking them for completeness, so that's not the EPA that's undertaking that.
That's-
So there's the two pathways are the
referral process and the EPA-led process, the substantive one.
MFE administers the referral process,
so there is a core operational delivery role there.
We also oversee the effectiveness and
efficiency of the entire system.
So one way to give you an example of that is,
the amendment bill that went through at the end of last year
that was focused on operational efficiencies and how to improve the
effectiveness of the system. So that's part of our stewardship
role.
Mm-hmm.
We also have undertaken a review of the
cost recovery system that we have in place.
There was an expectation that we would do a review at the one-year mark.
It's more focused, just to
build on Rachel's question, it's more focused on the operational efficiency
as the statute was designed. So it's not going into the broader
strategic impacts of the regime per se.
Okay. Thank you. And so that
stewardship-
Standardly
... that's not cost recoverable, that's absorbed by the ministry?
That's a good question. Yeah, the cost recovery piece would be the referral
process,
and then that broader stewardship piece, yes, you're correct, my understanding is
it's not cost recoverable.
Okay. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much. We have met time today.
We appreciate your time and the discussions
and topics we've covered today. So thank you very much.
And the ministry as a whole.
Yeah. Yeah.
We appreciate that.
Yes, I know. We acknowledged that earlier, but a full
acknowledgement to-
Yeah
... Sam and the team and everybody.
We, of course, appreciate all the work and you coming to
our select committee many, many times, so thank you.
Yeah. And it's rough, right? When your job's changing.
We appreciate how professional it will be,
so thank you.
Thank you.
Hang in there